Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. Donald A. Wollheim is one of the versatile
talents that science fiction occasionally produces. He's an author, editor,
critic, and publisher of science fiction. And his influence on the field has
been immense. He became involved in science fiction back in the early 30s, and
many of the things he did had not been done before. He and Forrest Ackerman can
be given much of the credit for starting fandom in the 1930s, for instance. And
as an editor, he's been an innovator and creator many times over. In 1972,
Wollheim founded DAW Books, the first mass-market publishing house devoted
entirely to science fiction. The word DAW, of course, comes from the initials of
Donald A. Wollheim's name. When we spoke with Wollheim, we asked him if he would
tell us about the beginning of DAW Books. Well, you know, I had been with Ace
Books for 19 and a half years. In fact, I was responsible for the founding of
the company, though I didn't own it. And after the death of A. A. Wyn, who was
his original publisher and owner, it passed into the hands of a group of Wall
Street speculators who wanted to build up some kind of a conglomerate in the
communications industry. And unfortunately, they made a number of bad mistakes.
And in about three years, the company was run downhill to where they were in
rather bad financial straits. And it was at that point, when it looked as if we
were likely to have our doors closed at any minute or any day, that I got
together and we talked, you know, I was thinking of the chance to get out and
start my own line. And the man who was the printer for Ace Books came to me and
said, You know, this is getting ridiculous. They owed him months and months of
payment. He said, why don't we break loose and start our own company? Well,
actually, that's put the idea in my head. But I didn't go into partnership with
him. What I did is scout around and we were able to successfully leave Ace and
launch our own company under our name, DAW Books, which is based on my initials.
Wollheim actually neither prints or markets his books. We made a very fine
arrangement with the New American Library that publishes the Signet Books for
distribution and for co-partnership, which means that, in a sense, I feed into
their operations. I am my own editor, my own publisher. I'm an independent
corporation. But they do our printing, they do our marketing and distribution
and handle the minor details. And, of course, we pay them for this. But it's
been a very profitable partnership between us. Wollheim's wife, Elsie, helps him
run DAW Books, so it's sort of a family affair. The odd thing about that was
that originally my secretary from Ace Books was going to come over with me. But
she got a little panicky and was afraid to leave an established job for one
which was insecure, and she didn't come. Instead, my wife, who had, many years
ago before she married me, been president of her own small corporation in the
manufacturing jewelry industry, knew the odds and ends of bookkeeping and
management of her business, instead, you know, came with me. So she's working as
my executive vice president. It's worked out marvelously. We're a husband and
wife team that is really becoming one of the wonders of the industry. We asked
Wollheim how many books he puts out each year. We do four new titles a month,
plus one full reissue of an old title that is sold well and is going out of
stock. That means five releases, actually. But as far as new titles are
concerned, we do approximately 60. That may be novels, reprints of hardcover
books, or new editions of books that have been sold out from other publishers
and are now available again, or anthologies, or some of our annuals. We do
several annuals, the Year's Best Horror, Year's Best Fantasy, and my own annual
World's Best Science Fiction collections. That's always been one of our
mainstays. More with Donald A. Wollheim next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show. A production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. We're talking with Donald A. Wollheim,
science fiction author, editor, and presently the publisher of DAW Science
Fiction Books. DAW Books is the only mass publisher devoted entirely to science
fiction, and the company puts out some 60 titles each year. We asked Wollheim how
he selects the books he'll publish. Is there a certain kind of story he looks
for? Well, actually, we try to be as varied as possible, but I go on the premise
in which I've always operated as an editor. If I like it, I publish it. This is
something which I sort of developed over the years. I've been almost 40 years as
an editor. And I discovered that by good luck or bad luck or whatever you have
it, I seem to be, what I like seems to be liked by at least 75% of the potential
readers. So maybe I have good taste, maybe I have bad taste. I don't honestly
know, but all I know is that what I like, I will find that my readers will
generally like. So in science fiction, I like some good hardcore science
fiction. I also like good adventure, the sort of Edgar Rice Burroughs type. We
do a series like that by Dray Prescott. And I like fantasy if it's nicely done.
And I'm really quite, quite wide open in my taste.
Wollheim is noted as an editor and publisher who can spot new talent. In his over
40 years as an editor, he's been responsible for introducing many of today's big
-name writers to the field. Two of his fortunate finds at DAW Books have been C.
J. Cherryh and Tanith Lee, both of whom published their first novels for
Wollheim. We asked him how he locates writers of that caliber. Do they seek him
out, or does he go looking for them? Both ways, actually. We have an established
image. People know what DAW Books are like. They know what they can expect. We
have a lot of people who are faithful readers because they feel that almost
every book that they buy, regardless of who writes it, is going to be something
they like because their tastes are obviously similar to mine. We pride ourselves
of being one of the very, very few companies that actually looks at and reads
every unsolicited manuscript that comes in. We don't read it all the way
through, but we look at it. Nothing goes through here without being inspected
and read, if it's possible. Now, that's how we find new authors. We found C. J.
Cherryh there. We found Tanith Lee that way. We found many other authors, Michael
Foster and Doris Berserky and so on, Jo Clayton. They are people we found. But
they submitted to us in the first place because they thought we were the kind of
publisher that was doing the kind of book they were writing. And if we both
agree, they're great.
We asked Wollheim if he ever suggests changes in an author's manuscript before
he'll publish it. In a few instances, we will suggest changes, but I don't
really like that system. I pride myself on the fact that the people who become
more or less regular contributors have gotten to know what I like, and what I
like is usually what they like. So we have a situation where I don't have to
tell many authors to rewrite or anything like that. If it's a project, of
course, we'll discuss the possible turns of it before the thing is even written.
But if it's a complete manuscript and I've read it and I like it, great. I do
very little, actually, in that sense of making an author revise and revise. What
about suggesting to an author that he write a sequel or expand a novel into a
trilogy? I usually do not. This is something that authors themselves come up
with. Authors dream of trilogies, and they will submit the first novel
and say there are two more sequels. If I agree with it, I don't mind. We'll
continue our conversation with Donald A. Wollheim on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane. And Bill Vernon. Have you ever wondered what goes into the
making of the science fiction paperback you just bought? You know that somebody
wrote it, and that some business enterprise printed it, but you probably don't
think much beyond those general facts. It takes eight months, usually, for the
typical paperback to complete the publishing cycle, and a lot happens in that
time. When we spoke with Donald A. Wollheim, a pioneer fan, author, and editor of
science fiction, and now the publisher of DAW Science Fiction Books, we asked
him if he would trace the publishing process through for us, beginning at the
moment he receives a manuscript. Well, of course. As I said, I have a schedule
of eight months ahead. Now, at the point that I write the manuscript, what I do
then is contact the author or the author's agent, whoever submitted it, and
discuss contract, and then we'll make up the contract which we sent to the
author to be signed. We'll pay out the initial advance on that, and that will
take about anywhere from three weeks to a month, and we put it in our inventory.
The next step is selecting an artist for the cover. Wollheim has an interesting
method for that. If the book is on schedule, within about, well, let's say,
within about two months or three months, I will take the manuscript, and have it
copied, have it Xeroxed, and give a copy to an artist that I think would do the
cover, the right cover for it. A number of different cover artists, and some do
better at certain types of stories than others. I prefer my artists to read the
manuscript. I prefer them to be actually science fiction readers to enjoy the
subject, and they usually do. So if they get a cover, they get a manuscript,
they will then have approximately one month to turn in the finished cover. What
they will do is read it, and then they will sketch out some possible covers,
bring in the sketches. We will okay one of them on guest changes, and they will
have another couple of weeks to turn in the complete painting, which would be
available at the end of that month. At that same time, we would then have to do
and put together the copy for the cover, the material on the back cover, the
titles and all that, which goes out to an agency that
does the layouts and type and all that. Then comes the important job of reading
the manuscript to locate and correct errors. Meanwhile, we then have a month in
which the book must be copy edited. That goes to an editor who goes over the
manuscript, making corrections, correcting spelling, correcting punctuation,
making any minor changes that might be necessary. And I say minor because any
major change would be done by the author, never by the copy editor. So a month
later, that manuscript would then go out to production.
Production, as a man, this would go through the American Library, you
understand. But there's a man there who was an old friend of mine who worked for
me at Ace and who's working for the New American Library now. He will design the
book. He will determine the size type, the layout of the title page, the layout
of pages, and will send it off to the printers. And we will next see in about
anywhere from two to five weeks the galleys and proofs of the front. And by
that time, it would be out a month ago. And the next thing we saw after that
would be the book itself. This just stretches out. So we're about five months
involved in the actual production. But it's a leisurely pace. It stretches out.
It works in very mechanically. And it just runs along. The paperback finally
shows up in a bookstore or supermarket, of course. And in the case of DAW Books,
it will be noticeable. That's because all DAW Books have bright yellow spines,
so they'll stand out in the science fiction section of the bookstore. And a lot
of intricate professional work lies behind that spine. We'll talk again with Donald
A. Wollheim on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And Daryl Lane. Since its inception in 1972, DAW Books has
published some of the best science fiction being written today. For the founder
of DAW Books, Donald A. Wollheim, it's been a satisfying and successful venture.
So successful, in fact, that some people have wondered why DAW Books doesn't try
hardback books in addition to the paperbacks it exclusively publishes. Wollheim
tells us why not. There are a couple of reasons for that. For one thing, I don't
know the hardback field. I have, well, I've been an editor of pulp magazines and
of paperback books, newsstand distributed books, since 1941. The New York Times
called me the dean of paperback editors. But to be frank, I have never been an
editor of hardcover books. It's a somewhat different field. The marketing
situation is different. The pricing situation is different. I would be sort of
an amateur. And I don't believe in sticking my neck out into a field in which I
really don't know what I'm doing. Now, I could, of course, make an arrangement
with a hardcover publisher. But I don't see it. I don't believe that a hardcover
book sells that well. You print, well, after all, in paperback, you print by the
tens of thousands of copies. In hardcover, you print what? 3,000 copies? 5,000?
Perhaps 7,000? So a hardcover editor comes in and says, gee, I've got a great
item. It sells 4,000 copies. Well, that's a joke to me. All right, there's money
in it. But I don't need the headache. I don't want it. I don't see it. Other
companies apparently do these things successfully. But that's because they're
probably connected up with a hardcover publisher, people who know their
business. I simply don't feel that I wish to get involved.
We asked Wollheim how many copies a paperback science fiction book would have to
sell before it generated a reasonable profit? That is very difficult to answer
because it would depend on the size of the book and the price of the book. But
very roughly, the average non-bestseller, say, book in the science fiction
fantasy category, may do well at 30,000 copies. In other words, by that point,
it will have cleared its course and made a small profit. Obviously, if it makes
50,000, not 60,000, 75,000 or 100,000, it's great. But the margin is quite low,
surprisingly enough. And so it is not as risky as you may think. Finally,
something of concern to all readers, what about the escalating prices of
paperbacks? How long before high prices make a real difference and begin to hurt
readers? I think it does make a difference. It hasn't affected science fiction,
I think, because we have a very ardent audience. And in general, paperbacks are
holding up much better than most of the book industry. But it does make a
difference. The question of how far prices can go up is something I couldn't
answer you because this is, you know, economic speculation. Who in heck knows? I
mean, nobody, nobody can guess what the economy is. We all hope that the
inflation will stop. And maybe it will. But if it doesn't, why, prices have to
go up accordingly because of the cost of paper, the cost of printers, the cost
of binding, the cost of distribution, the cost of marketing, everything goes up.
And you've got to, you've got to raise your price accordingly or you're, it's
impossible to do business. We do try very hard to be conservative about pricing.
We try to hold it back. We have discussions pretty regularly. I will sometimes
suggest that a book should be, let us say, $2.50. And we'll have the head of
marketing will come in and say, can't you make it $2.25 because you'd like to
hold this down? And if it's practical, we will. If it's not practical, I can't.
But the truth is that nobody wants to raise these prices. But we, you know, you
get pressed. Like anybody in any industry. We'll conclude our discussion with
Donald A. Wollheim on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon. DAW Books, publishing some of today's most
popular authors. We asked Donald A. Wollheim, founder and editor of DAW Books,
whose best-selling authors are. Well, our best-sellers are the John Norman Gor
books, Andre Norton's novels, C. J. Cherryh does very nicely, Tanith Lee goes
back to press pretty continuously, and let's see, well, we have quite a number
that do very nicely. Marion Zimmer Bradley, for instance, is always short, kept
continuously in print. We do the Mike Moorcock books, and they're continuously
in print. We do, well, many titles of that sort. So, our best-seller is John
Norman, of course. He sells by half a million at a book, and constantly in
print. In addition to books by individual authors, DAW Books also publishes many
anthologies each year. The best-known as DAW's annual The World's Best Science
Fiction, published each year since DAW Books' inception in 1972. We asked
Wollheim if he selected the stories in his anthologies himself. Uh, yes. It's a
tough cure, and I work with Arthur Saha, who is an old-time science fiction fan
and a determined reader of everything that comes out. And so Saha does the first
reading and sorts out the junk from the good ones and gives me a list of what he
thinks I should read. Well, that saves me an awful lot of work, and I sort
through his recommended list, and finally, we arrive at a, what we consider the
ten best, and that creates our annual. Does he have any criteria he goes by?
Yeah, if I like the story. Basically, of course, it also is the originality of
concept and originality of plot, and of course, how well it's written. All these
factors come into play. Generally speaking, if it's got a really original idea,
I would be strongly in favor of it. Unfortunately, science fiction being what it
is, not too many will come up with original ideas these days. We asked Wollheim
to tell us about some of the other anthologies DAW Books puts out, and we also
asked if his anthologies sold well. For us, they sell quite well. We have no
problems with the annual. We reissue it, usually four years later, as Wollheim's
World's Best Series five or four or six, because you can't have a dated book. A
dated book prejudices your dealers. So our 1982 annual, which is coming out in a
couple of months, of course, covers the best in 1981. Other books, like the
Year's Best Horror Stories, being edited for us by Karl Edward Wagner, who is
himself a good name and a good writer in that field. Year's Best Fantasy, used
to be edited for us by Lin Carter, but now is being handled by Arthur Saha
directly.
And Isaac Asimov is doing an encyclopedic study of the early days, beginning
with 1939 and working up to the present in about two books a year, called Asimov
Presents the Great SF Stories. And I did one volume of Terra SF, which was the
best stories from Western Europe, which was edited for me by a French science
fiction fan that's familiar with the field and managed to arrange to get
translations from all over Western Europe. I will probably continue that on a
once-every-two-years basis. So it works. Wollheim has had a career in science
fiction that's lasted over 50 years. In all aspects of science fiction, he's one
of the pioneers of the field. He's been a fan, an author, a critic, an editor,
and now, with DAW Books, a publisher. As with few others, he's devoted his life
to science fiction and left an indelible mark on the field.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.